The last thing that I wanna show is I
wanna show how to manage environment
variables in Gatsby because it's,
very straightforward but
there's a little bit of
a mental model around.
Really all the static site generators,
anything that builds client side code
usually has a convention for the
difference between an environment variable
that should be available to the client.
And one that should only be
available in the build process and
in server less functions,
and Gatsby is no exception.
So what we can do for this is I wanna
create a couple environment variables and
I'll start by just having
a let's create a page.
And our page is going to be called nvs.js.
And so I want to import everything
is react from react and
then we're going to export default
function and various page.
And what I wanna do on this
page is just return details
about what the environment variables are.
So this is huge caveat here.
What we're doing here is for
demo purposes.
This is actually a terrible idea.
Don't share your environment
variables publicly on your website.
Now, an important thing to note is
that anything that is available to
the client side is
embedded in public code.
So if you put an API key that shouldn't
be public Into your Gatsby public
environment variables.
Someone can go inspect your bundle and
find that key.
So it's really important that you
only expose things to Gatsby on
the client side that
can be publicly shared.
Because anything that you do will
be put into the code as a publicly
available environment variable.
So Let's just give ourselves a header
we'll say environment variables.
And then down here I'm going
to just we're gonna dump two.
So the first one is gonna be
called Gatsby public value.
And we wanna show process dot
m dot Gatsby public value.
And then the other one that we wanna
show is going to be called secret value.
And these are two separate kinds of
environment variables in Gatsby.
The first kind is prefixed
with Gatsby underscore.
This is a signal to Gatsby B that
this variable is allowed to be
on the client site.
And this is a really important thing to
note because it's effectively an opt in.
You're saying by prefixing this
environment variable with Gatsby
underscore.
I am acknowledging that I am
about to make this value public.
It's going to go into my source,
bundle secret value down here, though.
Gatsby is not gonna pick that up.
So I'm actually expecting
that once we set these,
this one shouldn't show me anything.
But right now they're not set at all.
So let's set some environment variable.
So I'm gonna M set Gatsby public.
Value and
I wanna set that to this is okay to share.
Then I'm gonna run it again and
set secret value,
this is a secret right, so
these are just placeholders.
These aren't real environment variables.
But this is how you would also
store your say, API token.
If you were gonna read from GitHub or
you wanted to send email with a service
like mail gun or send grid or
something, you would have an API
key that identifies your account.
And those need to stay secret.
So those would not be
prefixed with Gatsby.
And another thing that I'm doing here
is I'm using the the Netlify COI to set
these because one of the things that is
a pain to me at least is trying to manage
different dot n files and then like so I'm
working on a site and I've got my dot env.
And then I deploy and
then the site fails because
the environment variables aren't set.
And then I like share it
with my co worker, and
they can't get it running because they
don't have the environment variables.
So by using the COI,
what we're actually doing is we're
setting it at the project level.
So when I ran this COI command what
actually ended up happening is
in my project when I go to the build and
deploy and
then environment,
these get set from the COI.
And then what's even cooler is
what I'm about to show you here
is when I run netlify dev Look at that,
from the site.
From app.netlify.com these got
pulled down for local depth.
So it'll also pick up dot n file so that
you don't have to like write a dot n or
anything like that.
But it is so nice to just set my
environment variables once and
then not have to think about if I share
this site if I publish it environment
variables are there.
If I send it to a co worker and
they're on my netlify account,
environment variables are already there.
So all these things that
somebody would need are,
they're all like managed
in a very nice way.
So let's go check out
this inverse page and
let's see if we got the expected outcome.
And we did look so Gatsby public value.
Okay, that's what I expected.
We can see this, and it would show
up in the source code as well,
if we were to use this somewhere
in like a react component.
Secret value, though, is empty.
It's not shared.
And the reason that this works
is that what Gatsby is doing at
build time is it's actually
replacing these values wholesale.
So it is going in and looking for
process dot m dot Gatsby public value.
And it will then remove this entirely.
So the source code,
what's actually being published
here is not this, it's the value.
It's like that, right?
So that's what's being done and
what's being shared.
So this is a very cool process where,
you basically said if it's prefixed
with Gatsby got to grab it.
Another caveat to this, is that that
means that you can't do things like this,
like Gatsby, public value,
equals process.env,
unless they've changed this recently,
because this won't get picked up.
Maybe they rewrote that it used to be that
it was it was like wholesale match like
process dot and had to be present.
But that's the thing to keep in mind
because that does happen in other
frameworks like.
I think next has that issue where you need
to use the whole life process.mstring.
But it looks like Gatsby fixed it so good
for them, one less thing to worry about.
So, the other thing though is that
once you've set an environment
variable like this, you do wanna be able
to access it in your Serverless functions.
Because that's what serverless
functions are there for
is to do work with sensitive
details because they're secure.
Nobody can get the code inside of
a serverless function unless it's like,
unless they have access to
logging something out of it.
So if you write the code and
you don't log any of your secrets,
you can use them in here.
And no one will be able to get at him.
So it's a good way to do like secure
form submissions or sending mail or
things like that.
So if I create a API
call called n vair and
this one is gonna export
default function handler, and
we'll get a, we don't want to use
the rest, so we'll use the res.
And then in here, I'm going to res.Json.
And let's just get
the same thing from here.
So we don't have to
retype all of this out.
Okay, so
that is going to give us our values back.
And again, big disclaimer,
this is a terrible idea.
Don't return your environment
variables from a call.
Looks like I need to restart to
get that function to pick up.
It's not plural.
That's what's wrong.
There we go.
So we can see that in
the serverless function,
the environment variable is there.
So this is how we can work
with these private values,
like if I need to make a privileged call,
I would do it in a serverless function.
And then I can return the results
of that without exposing my keys.
So this is another way that that server
less functions kind of level you up
as a developer as, they give you access
to do this sort of thing that otherwise,
you'd have to go stand up a server.
And you'd have to deal with all these
other things that there's nothing
inherently wrong with them, but it's just
one more chore that you have to do before
you can solve the problem at hand.
And what I like about serverless functions
is we were just here we can just do
the thing, right?
So this then get this set up if
we wanna get add everything.
And let's get commit,
we'll say add and their demo.
It's, Just gonna add up big old
like this is not a great idea.
Don't do this.
So let's push and
we'll see when we go back to
our deployments here that
it's already building.
And it's gonna pull in our
environment variables.
And we will get the same output on
the client side and this should happen.
Hopefully we'll see how it goes.
It should happen in about a minute
because the cache is warm.
While we're waiting for this to build,
does anybody have any questions because
we are starting to come to the end here.
We're gonna do some further resources and
q&a and
then we're gonna call this thing a wrap.
So if you've got questions for
today, now's the time
>> The serverless functions piece kind of
lifted their mental blocks around
the power of serverless functions and
like cookies and
mental block around working through that.
>> No joke when I,
started working with serverless functions,
I think before I picked them up, I had in
my head, that there was just a ceiling.
To what I was capable of unless I
wanted to go and be a full stack Dev.
And I've been a full stack dev
the beginning of my career
was actually more on the PHP MySQL side.
And as I moved more into the front end,
I just found that I preferred that.
I preferred working on the front
end It made me I don't know,
it was just more fun for me, I guess.
And so I would get to this certain
point in any project where I would just
start looking at the tasks and
I'd be like, this isn't worth it.
I don't wanna go that
far back into the stack.
So whatever idea I had, I'd start talking
myself out of it, and start convincing
myself that what I wanted to do was
was too ambitious, too expensive,
too much time and just not worthy,
you will have a different idea right?
When I adopted server less functions,
it was like this fog cleared and
suddenly all of my ideas were possible.
And so we've been able to do Just so
much goofy fun stuff we good example of,
like serverless functions,
unblocking things is we wanted to build
this thing for explorers where you could
like take courses and learn stuff.
In order to do this,
I needed like I wanted OAuth,
I wanted you to have an account.
So we needed to set up
this OAuth workflow.
Well, turns out that was
server less functions.
I did this in three functions.
And now I've got actual login and
I can go and have a dashboard, and
all this apparently I achieved something
in my [LAUGH] I did something I guess.
But I can see like now completed tasks in
jamstack explorers and I've like earned
a certificate and downloading the
certificate is also a serverless function.
We take your name and then we
generate a I think it's an SVG file,
turn that into a PDF and
then we return that to you.
And we with the missions out here
we're doing checks to see like,
when you watch one of these, we're sending
off serverless function calls to track,
how many seconds of it have you watched.
All of these things are things that in my
mind, were like, that's too much work.
I am not gonna build a server
that can manage that.
But with serverless functions, each one
of these things is one tiny function.
I don't think any function on this
project is more than a dozen or
maybe two dozen lines of code.
And that gives us the ability
to just build whatever we want.
I'm completely unblocked.
And so
if you wanna see some more like ambitious,
like real world projects,
this is a good one the netlify explorers
repo has a bunch of functions in it of,
here's how we handle our auth.
And here's how we do certificates and
here's how we're checking whether or
not you had an achievement,
sending off reward stuff,
all sorts of funding things
that we can do in here.
And all of that is possible with
serverless functions in a way that it
wouldn't have been or would have
been significantly more complex for
us to build had we tried to stand up
like an Explorer's micro service.
That ran all of those as
one kind of back end.
So yeah, It really does.
I don't know I just I feel like
it gave me extra power like,
instead of feeling like being
a front end dev has a ceiling.
Now I feel like being a front
end dev is a superpower because
the hard part in a lot of cases is
making it look and feel fun to use.
And that's the part that I enjoy
that's the part that I'm good at is
building fun websites.
If I can jump over to my silly website and
make some goofy stuff that like
let's make the website make a boot
noise whenever you click a button or
have like, sound Effects things like that.
But then when I wanna make it useful,
I wanna pull stuff from different
services or I wanna hook in my blogs.
Or something like all of
those things that we can do,
I just have a serverless
function to enable that.
So I can go pretty deep in
the stack without having to go
tap on the shoulder of
somebody who's a back end Dev.
So I feel like my world expanded
to the border of limitless,
there's still stuff like I still every
once in a while, build a real server.
I'm trying to do real time or I'm trying
to set up a graph qL subscription or
something like that.
But in almost all of the normal
day to day cases that I hit,
I found that a serverless function gets me
there and takes me a fraction of the time.
So I really am all in on serverless.
I think it's such a cool way to work.
And in such a power up for front end
developers, web developers to go out and
just build whatever you can imagine.
So our site's built, I wanna go and
just poke at it real quick and
make sure that inverse
thing did what we expected.
So here's our environment variables.
Again, the secret value is not there,
public value is there in the website.
And then we also have in
our API no trailing slash
that the API has access
to our secret variables.
So this is the the general experience
that you're looking at inside of
Gatsby is you can share
these environment variables.
You can do all that and
because we manage them with netlify,
they were all kind of often out of
the way after we set them once.
Instead of having to get that dot n file
from my local machine into settings on
another machine.